14th installment of #100Viz: "Finding Stories"

Quickly after starting this series I realized how hard it is to come up with new ideas constantly. Fortunately, this week's episode of @DataVizToday tackled just that. In the episode, Alli talks about this workflow editors use when approaching a story and she translates it to the data-world and applies it to MakeoverMonday's dataset on avocado prices. Because the point of the series is to practice a little every day and not a lot every now and then I decided to approach the same dataset and maybe follow a similar path with a different end result.

The key is CRT: Conflict -> Timeliness -> Resolution. Starting with a fact or stat, 1) what's the consequence? 2) why talk about it now? 3) what can you do about it?.

I studied economics as well and I wanted to know about price trends but not in the straight-forward case. I already expect to pay about a dollar or dollar fifty per avocado. Maybe two if it's organic. Now 1) -stat/conflict- I know organic avocados are more expensive and I'm willing to pay that premium sometimes. 2) -timeliness- but when is the best time to switch from conventional to organic and get that extra yummy avocado? I don't mean necessarily when the prices are closest - I assumed they follow similar trends (before looking at the data). Here's the scenario: Let's say conventional avocados are usually $1.50 and organic $2.50. I walk it expecting to pay 1.50 for an avocado but I see there's a deal: conventional avocados are $1.20 and organic $2. Technically, both have 20% discount and the conventional avocado is still cheaper but I, personally, would take the chance to buy the organic avocado because in my mind they're usually cost $2.50 and it's just an extra 50 cents from what I expected to spend today to get a really good avocado. 

What I'm saying is, organic and conventional avocados are not necessarily perfect substitutes, I get a greater utility out of an organic avocado and therefore I am willing to pay a little more but only sometimes. I want to find out when those times are. So what I did was compare each (seasonally adjusted) price point to the 3-year weighted-average price of their type of avocado (conventional ($1.08) or organic ($1.64)) to see when is the best time to get each. For example, May 2015 and 2017, organic avocados were below the average price by around 3% and conventional avocados were 8% more expensive than they usually are. Maybe as a consumer you don't care but if you are buying a few thousands of avocados, like your supermarket, it can make a difference which translates into deals you as a consumer may or may not get. 

the second figure illustrates the premium you pay for organic avocados. It seems like March and early September is when the price difference dips. At first I wanted to find each month's average and compare them to see what's the best month to get organic avocados but I like this time-trend visualization. It's like analyzing stocks but with avocado prices. Maybe a rolling average could be telling of a different story.